SQL 
Structured Query Language (SQL) is a
programming language
is typically used in relational database or data stream management systems.

Its ease of use and the highly effective manner in which it queries, manipulates, aggregates data and performs a wide range of other functions to turn massive collections of structured data into usable information.
For this reason, it has been incorporated into numerous commercial database products, such as MySQL, Oracle, Sybase, SQL Server, Postgres and others. In fact, many non-relational databases like MongoDB and DynamoBD are called NoSQL products due to their lack of SQL programming.

History
It was developed by IBM in the early 1970s and is now an official standard recognized by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). noSQL = not only SQL

Sequential (Disk drive)
We didn't have a lot of storage or disk drive. We used tape drives but their problem is they were sequential, you read this and advance and on and on. This system requires sorting called sequential master update. Different from random access. The question was how to layout data to be most efficient?
Relational (SQL)
Relational databases model data by storing rows and columns in tables.
The power of the relational database lies in its ability to efficiently retrieve data from those tables and in particular where there are multiple tables and the relationships between those tables involved in query.

Database - file that is organised for storing data and contains many tables. Most databases are organised like a dictionary in the sense that they map from keys to values. The biggest difference is that the database is on disk (or other permanent storage), so it persists after the program ends. Because a database is stored on permanent storage, it can store far more data than a dictionary, which is limited to the size of the memory in the computer

Relation (or table)
contains tuples and attributes
Tuple (or row/record)
a set of attributes that generally represents an “object” like a person or a music track
Attribute(or column/field)
one of possibly many elements of data corresponding to the object represented by the row

Primary key
The primary key uniquely identifies each record in the table
Most tables should have a primary key
Each table can have more than one column which is part of its primary key (Composite key) e.g. Order No + Order line No
It can either be an attribute that is unique (such as national insurance) or it can be generated by the DBMS
The DBMS will enforce the uniqueness of the primary key, not allowing repeated records to exist in the table
Two types of primary key
Simple – A single primary key is given to a unique identifier of the entity, such as Customer ID.
Compound/composite primary key – Combines more than one field to make a unique value, such as Customer ID + Order ID
Primary key contraints
A primary key must always be unique.
Must always have an entry, cannot be blank or null
The value must never change
Each table may have a maximum of one primary key
Foreign key
Natural relationships exist between tables in most database structures foreign keys are used to create solid relationships
Foreign keys ensure that the row of the information in table A corresponds to the correct row of information in Table B
The contraint is used to prevent actions that would destroy links between tables.
It prevents invalid data from being inserted into the froeign key column, because it has to be on of the values contained in the table it points too.
There is no uniqness constraint for foreign keys.
A table can have any number of foreign keys.
A row cannot be delted from the referance table if it is in use via a foreign key.
Foreign key will always be used to have a one to many relationship.
Composite key
A composite key is used when their is no unique candidate for the primary key. To make the composite key you can merge 2 colnmns together, forming a unique composite key
Type of database
Flat-file database • Stores everything in one table. Good for small numbers of records related to a single topic.
Relational database • Gives you the ability to separate masses of data into numerous tables. • They are linked to each other through the use of keys.
Big data • MongoDB, Vertica etc • Used for data analytics and buissness inteligence • Digital age and internet of things
One to one
In a one-to-one relationship, one record in a table is associated with one and only one record in another table. For example, in a school database, each student has only one student ID, and each student ID is assigned to only one person.

SSL - Secure Sockets Layer
Security protocol used to secure data between two machines using encryption.

In this example, the key field in each table, Student ID, is designed to contain unique values. In the Students table, the Student ID field is the primary key; in the Contact Info table, the Student ID field is a foreign key.

One to many
In a one-to-many relationship, one record in a table can be associated with one or more records in another table. For example, each customer can have many sales orders. A one-to-many relationship looks like this:

In this example the primary key field in the Customers table, Customer ID, is designed to contain unique values. The foreign key field in the Orders table, Customer ID, is designed to allow multiple instances of the same value. This relationship returns related records when the value in the Customer ID field in the Orders table is the same as the value in the Customer ID field in the Customers table.

Many to many
A many-to-many relationship refers to a relationship between tables in a database when a parent row in one table contains several child rows in the second table, and vice versa. Many-to-many relationships are often tricky to represent. (EXAMPLE: A database used by a school application can be taken as an example. Two of the tables it contains are "Student" and "Subject." In real life, a student will take several subjects simultaneously, while a subject will be studied by several students at a time. This is a many-to-many relationship.)
Example: One row in one database related to many rows in another database. Students table with various information links to a table of list of courses. One student can take many courses and many courses can be taken by many students Insert a junction table to use primary keys from both the tables.

Junction Table
When you need to establish a many-to-many relationship between two groups, the simplest solution is to use a Junction Table. A Junction Table (sometimes referred to as a "Bridge Table") is a table that contains references to both groups; bridging them together. (Example: Where there is a many to many relationship you can make a junction table with the primary keys of the tables, then form a junction table. This table then forms a composite primary key. Candidate Primary key - If there are multiple choices for being a primary key, then all the options are called candidates for being the primary key

Composite primary key
When there are not any candidates to becoming a primary key, you can merge 2 of the columns.

Three Categories of SQL Commands
Data Definition Language (DDL)
This includes CREATE (tables, views, objects, etc.), ALTER and DROP (delete). TRUNCATE gets you all the data out of the table. Does not drop the table. Keeps the table empty.

Data Manipulation Language (DML)
SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE of records within tables.

Data Control Language (DCL)
GRANT and/or REVOKE user privileges to the database.

Transaction Control Language (TCL)
COMMIT, ROLLBACK (undo) and SAVEPOINT

SELECT - extracts data from a database
UPDATE - updates data in a database
DELETE - deletes data from a database
INSERT INTO - inserts new data into a database
CREATE DATABASE - creates a new database
ALTER DATABASE - modifies a database
CREATE TABLE - creates a new table
ALTER TABLE - modifies a table
DROP TABLE - deletes a table
CREATE INDEX - creates an index (search key)
DROP INDEX - deletes an index

Datatypes
VARCHAR – adaptable to different lengths of characters. Records MAX size. Memory efficient. Commonly used for things such as name. CHARACTER or CHAR – 50% faster than VARCHAR. Example of using CHAR might be on a car licence plate or phone numbers. Anything where the number of characters is known. Data must be fixed amount of space.
INT – holds a whole number/integer.
DATE or TIME or DATETIME- stores date, time or both date and time.
DECIMAL OR NUMERIC – Fixed precision and scale(digits to the right of the decimal point) e.g. DECIMAL(5, 2) —> The number in cell has total of 5 digits with 2 digits after decimal point

BINARY – used to store binary data such as an image or file
FLOAT – Scientific use (very large numbers)
BIT – equivalent to binary (0, 1 or null)

NOTE IMPORTANT
When inserting VARCHAR, CHAR, DATE and DATETIME use single quotes.
All other data types don’t need single quotes.
Use ; after each statement
IDENTITY(1,1)  1+1=2, 3, 4, 5

NULL is not nothing, but it does not equate to zero.
It isn’t even an empty string.
A value can be NULL, but NULL never equals NULL because NULL is an undefined value.






Application developer - builds the logic for the application, the look and feel of the application - monitors the application for problems

Database administrator - monitors and adjusts the database as the program runs in production. Responsible for the design, implementation, maintenance and repair of an organisations database. Includes the development and design of database strategies, monitoring, improving database performance and capacity and planning for future expansion requirements. They may also plan, cordinate and implement security measures to safeguard the database

Database model or schema - is the structure or format of a databse, described in a formal language supported by the databse management system. In other words a “database model” is the application of a data model when used in conjunction with a database management system.

There are many different database systems which are used for a wide variety of purposes including:
Oracle - large, commercial, entreprise-scale, very very tweakable
MySQL - simpler but very fast and scalable - commercial open source
Microsoft SQL Server  - very nice (also Access)
PostgreSQL. SQLite is an embedded database system. The power comes when we have more than one table and we can exploit the relationships between the tables. Small piece of software so it is often integrated in other softwares.

UNIQUE: Applying this constraint to a column ensures that no two entries in that column are identical.
NOT NULL: This constraint ensures that a column doesn’t have any NULL entries.
PRIMARY KEY: A combination of UNIQUE and NOT NULL, the PRIMARY KEY constraint ensures that no entry in the column is NULL and that every entry is distinct.
FOREIGN KEY: A FOREIGN KEY is a column in one table that refers to the PRIMARY KEY of another table. This constraint is used to link two tables together: entries to the FOREIGN KEY column must already exist in the parent PRIMARY KEY column for the write process to succeed.
CHECK: This constraint limits the range of values that can be entered into a column. For example, if your application is intended only for residents of Alaska, you could add a CHECK constraint on a ZIP code column to only allow entries between 99501 and 99950.
DEFAULT: This provides a default value for a given column. Unless another value is specified, SQLite enters the default value automatically.
INDEX: Used to help retrieve data from a table more quickly, this constraint is similar to an index in a textbook: instead of having to review every entry in a table, a query only has to review entries from the indexed column to find the desired results.


Database design

representing relationships in a databse
DATABASE NORMALIZATION
dont replicate data - reference data (point at data)
use integers for keys and for references
add a special key column to each table which we will make references to. By convention, many programmers call this column ‘id’

Never use logical key as primary, keep seperate

The resulting combinations of tables does not have repetition. By removing replicated data and replacing it with references to a single copy of each bit of data, we build a “web” of information that the relational database can read through very quickly.
Often when you want some data it comes from a number of tables linked by these foreign keys.

Up until now it has been one to many relationships, now lets look at many to many relationships
Like one book has many authors or authors have many books

We need to add a “connection” table with two foreign keys
A membership table which is the connector table


Additional SQL topics
Indexes - improve access performance for things like string fields
Constraints - Constraints are the rules enforced on data columns on a table. These are used to limit the type of data that can go into a table. This ensures the accuracy and reliability of the data in the database.
Transactions - allow SQL operations to be grouped and done as a unit




Database Considerations
Data security
Rata recovery
Data integrity
Normal form

Normalisation
Normalisation is what we do to attain a better design and a better performance. We reduce all the redundant values from the database. An example of these redundant values are repeated values.

1st Normal form
A database is in First Normal Form when the following considerations are satisfied. Make everything atomic
Data must be presented as small as it can be
There should be no repeating groups For example A table that records data on a book and its author(s) with the following columns: [Book ID], [Author1],[Author2], [Author3] is not in 1NF because [Author1],[Author2] and [Author3] are all repeating the same attribute. How can we make this 1NF?

2nd Normal Form
A database is in Second Normal Form when he following conditions are satisfied:
It is in 1NF
All non-key attributes are fully functional dependent on the primary key
Here a composite key is used, “Product ID and “Store” combine to make the primary key In this case “Location” only depends on “store” which is only part of the primary key.

3rd Normal Form
A database is in Third Normal Form when the following conditions are satisfied:
It is in 2NF
There is no transitive functional dependency. For example
A transitive functional dependency is when a non-key column is functionally dependent on another non-key column, which is functionally dependent on the primary key.
In this example Book ID determines Genre ID, which in turn determines Genre Type – that means they are functionally dependent on each other.

ON DELETECASCADE = A foreign key with cascade delete means that if a record in the parent table is deleted, then the corresponding records in the child table will automatically be deleted. This is called a cascade delete in SQL Server.
